.TH WESTON-RDP 7 "2017-12-14" "Weston @version@"
.SH NAME
weston-vnc \- the VNC backend for Weston
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B weston --backend=vnc-backend.so
.
.\" ***************************************************************
.SH DESCRIPTION
The VNC backend allows to run a
.B weston
environment without the need of specific graphic hardware, or input devices. Users can interact with
.B weston
only by connecting using the remote framebuffer protocol (RFB).

The VNC backend uses Neat VNC to implement the VNC part, it acts as a VNC server
listening for incoming connections. It supports different encodings for encoding
the graphical content, depending on what is supported by the VNC client.

The VNC backend is not multi-seat aware, so if a second client connects to the
backend, the first client will be disconnected.

Note that authentication and encryption are not supported yet. Anyone with
access to the port can get control of the desktop via the VNC output, and
all data is transferred in plaintext.

.\" ***************************************************************
.SH CONFIGURATION
.
The VNC backend uses the following entries from
.BR weston.ini .
.SS Section vnc
.TP
\fBrefresh-rate\fR=\fIrate\fR
Specifies the desktop redraw rate in Hz. If unspecified, the default is 60Hz. Changing
this may be useful if you have a faster than 60Hz display, or if you want to reduce updates to
reduce network traffic.

.\" ***************************************************************
.SH OPTIONS
.
When the VNC backend is loaded,
.B weston
will understand the following additional command line options.
.TP
.B \-\-width\fR=\fIwidth\fR
The width of the framebuffer. It defaults to 640.
.TP
.B \-\-height\fR=\fIheight\fR
The height of the framebuffer. It defaults to 480.
.TP
\fB\-\-port\fR=\fIport\fR
The TCP port to listen on for connections. It defaults to 5900.

.\" ***************************************************************
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR weston (1)
.\".BR weston.ini (5)
